---
title: "The Sun's Magnetic Field"
author: "Kanishk Vishwakarma"
description: "Stars have intruiging magnetic fields, and our Sun is no exception. Read along to read more about the Sun's magnetic field and how it protects us from the cosmic radiation."
layout: post
toc: false
comments: true
image: images/blog_covers/6_sun_magnetic_field.jpg
hide: false
search_exclude: false
categories: [Electromagnetism, Heliophysics, Physics]
---

Our Sun is just like other billions of trillions of stars in the universe, but it holds a special place to all of humanity and life, as we know it. It has been providing us with heat and light for about 4.6 billion years, and will continue to do so for about another 5.5 billion years. The sun is something we have worshiped for many millenium. The sun is a star that we have studied the most, and yet know so little of it. 
The Sun is a really big rotating ball of burning gases mostly made up of hydrogen and helium, with little amounts of Carbon, Nitrogen and Oxygen. When the Sun was forming, giant blobs of hydrogen gas gradually collapsed into each other and made the gravity stronger more than ever. The increasing gravity created a pressure that compressed the hydrogen so much that the process of nuclear fusion began, in which two hydrogen atoms came so close so as to fuse the actual atoms together into something known as Helium. This nuclear fusion process releases so much energy that it increases the pressure even more in the insides of the Sun, and thus slowly transforms hydrogen into helium. With the increased gravity, energy and heat, the nuclear fusion process proceeds to make even heavier atoms. Because the Sun is super hot and is an active region of nuclear fusion, the buoyancy is so high that sometimes the charged particles and hot gases escape from the Sun. Some are fortunate enough to leave it for eternity, but some are pulled back into the surface by the Sun’s enormous gravity. Visuals have shown patterns of bright and dark regions. The bright regions are where it is hot and dark lanes around them are where the gas is cooled off and starts getting pulled back inside the sun. The dynamic process continues and since the Sun is so bright, we can’t see anything more than those patterns even with very good lenses and sensors. But if we change the perspective a little we start to see very interesting features. A coronagraph is a device used to see the nearby regions of a bright star whose brightness blinds us to see interesting stuff happening near it. Speaking very abstractly, a coronagraph is a small disc which covers the sunlight beam’s central region so as to make a silhouette which covers the Sun, and now we start seeing fountains of plasma and hot gases that otherwise we are unable to see with ordinary telescopes. Because these flares are abundant in charged particles and since moving charged particles create magnetic fields around them, the plasma jets therefore follow really crazy trajectories. These highly charged groups of particles create weak flare magnetic fields and shoot into eternal space. These weak energy particles are not, however, what we see on a coronagraph and there is another source of magnetic fields that make strong magnetic solar flares. As the Sun is a giant rotating ball of hot gases and charged particles, here the particles that move with the sun’s spin create magnetic fields so strong that we can actually see the effects of those strong magnetic fields via seeing the behavior of charged particles that follow these strong field lines. Because the field lines often loop back into the surface, the charged particles following them also loop back into the surface. As the charged particles follow these strong field lines upwards, they cool down and lose energy as radiation, and when they fall back down on the surface in large amounts, we see a colder region which are popularly known as the Sun spots. Sometimes these strong field lines are so strong that they never loop back into the surface and the particles following them leave the surface forever, and this makes a weak current field around the Sun which spans all the way to the last planets of our solar system and beyond.
These strong magnetic fields can loop back from one side of the Sun to the other side, essentially making it a giant magnet. The polarity of the Sun’s magnetic field, however, isn't stable. As the magnetic fields form in big chunks, they push each other. The different latitude layers of the Sun spin with different speeds with much greater speeds around the equator than at poles. This, along with the fact that magnetic field lines must not cross each other, entangles the field lines gradually. Something which you might have also come across, if you twist a thread, at one point it starts getting entangled. It is difficult to stretch in the entangled form. This is what happens with the looping magnetic fields, they entangle with each other and twist to form very complicated knots. At a point they become so energised that they start breaking and radiate as an antenna, just that here we are not only talking about the electric and magnetic fields but also hot gases and charged particles which follow them. These violent events form the solar winds which travel with high speeds and energy into space. These events are also called Coronal Mass Ejections, or CMEs for short. When directed towards the Earth, the CMEs get trapped in the Earth’s own magnetic field and form beautiful auroras at poles. If strong enough, they can also interfere with long range radio communication. The entanglements of the Sun’s magnetic field lines become so violent that it reaches an unstable equilibrium and the poles switch positions. This is an event that mysteriously occurs about every 11 years, with the dynamics on the Sun being relatively calm at what is called a Solar Minima, and highly violent activities happening around the time which is called a Solar Maxima. Because of this behavior and the massive size of the Sun, it is possible for it to exist with a monopole magnetic field, i.e, without the existence of one of the two poles. This event is not uncommon, in fact the data shows that it happens at every polarity reversal event, though the duration of the Sun being a monopole might vary.

Seeing at a larger scale, the Sun seems like a magnetic field source. The Sun’s magnetic field isn’t shaped, however, how you would expect it to be. The shape is an arithmetic spiral and that is because of two reasons: 
1. Magnetohydrodynamic influence of the solar wind.
2. Vastness of space in which the magnetic field is being emitted into.


### Points to cover:

* Sunspots and magnetic fields
* Parker solar wind theory
* Coronagraph
* Potential field source surface model
* Heliosphere of the Earth & the Sun. Heliophysics
* Solar Dynamics Observatory
* Coronal Mass Ejection
* Solar cycle
* Lagrange point of Earth & Sun

